Quantitative magnetic resonance imaging (QMRI) produces images of potential MR biomarkers: measurable tissue properties related to physiological processes that characterize the onset and progression of specific disorders. Though QMRI has potential to be more diagnostic than conventional qualitative MRI, QMRI poses challenges beyond those of conventional MRI that limit its feasibility for routine clinical use. This thesis first seeks to address two of those challenges. It then applies these solutions to develop a new method for myelin water imaging, a challenging application that may be specifically indicative of certain white matter disorders.

One challenge that presently precludes widespread clinical adoption of QMRI involves relatively long scan durations: to disentangle potential biomarkers from numerous nuisance MR contrast mechanisms, QMRI typically requires more data than conventional MRI and thus longer scans. Even allowing for long scans, it has previously been unclear how to systematically tune the "knobs" of highly flexible MR acquisitions so as to reliably enable precise biomarker estimation. Chapter 4 formalizes these challenges as a min-max optimal acquisition design problem that seeks scan parameter combinations that robustly enable precise object parameter estimation. It applies this technique to optimize combinations of spoiled gradient-recalled echo (SPGR) and dual-echo steady-state (DESS) scans for T1/T2 relaxometry in white matter (WM) and grey matter (GM) regions of the human brain at 3T field strength. Phantom accuracy experiments showed that SPGR/DESS scan combinations are in excellent agreement with reference measurements. Phantom precision experiments showed that trends in T1/T2 pooled sample standard deviations reflect theoretical predictions. In vivo experiments showed that in WM and GM, T1/T2 estimates from a pair of optimized DESS scans exhibit precision comparable to that of optimized combinations of SPGR and DESS scans. To our knowledge, T1 maps from DESS acquisitions are new. This example application illustrates that acquisition design can enable new biomarker estimation techniques from established MR pulse sequences, a fact that subsequent chapters exploit.

Another QMRI challenge involves the typically nonlinear dependence of MR signal models on the underlying potential biomarkers of interest: these nonlinearities cause conventional likelihood-based estimators to either scale very poorly with the number of unknowns or risk producing suboptimal estimates due to spurious local minima. Chapter 5 instead introduces a fast, general method for dictionary-free QMRI parameter estimation via regression with kernels (PERK). PERK first uses prior distributions and the nonlinear MR signal model to simulate many parameter-measurement pairs. Inspired by machine learning, PERK then takes these parameter-measurement pairs as labeled training points and learns from them a nonlinear regression function using kernel functions and convex optimization. PERK admits a simple implementation as per-voxel nonlinear lifting of MRI measurements followed by linear minimum mean-squared error regression. Chapter 5 demonstrates PERK for T1/T2 estimation using one of the SPGR/DESS acquisitions optimized in Chapter 4. Numerical simulations as well as single-slice phantom and in vivo experiments demonstrated that PERK and two well-suited maximum-likelihood (ML) estimators produce comparable T1/T2 estimates in WM and GM, but PERK is consistently at least 140x faster. Similar comparisons to an ML estimator in a more challenging QMRI estimation problem (described in Chapter 6) suggest that this 140x acceleration factor will increase by several orders of magnitude for full-volume QMRI estimation problems involving more latent parameters per voxel.

Chapter 6 applies ideas developed in previous chapters to design a new fast method for imaging myelin water content, a potential biomarker for healthy myelin. Since myelin degeneration characterizes certain white matter disorders (e.g., multiple sclerosis), myelin water quantification could improve MRI specificity for monitoring the onset and progression of such demyelinating conditions. Specifically, Chapter 6 first develops a two-compartment DESS signal model and then uses a Bayesian variation of acquisition design (Chapter 4) to optimize a new DESS acquisition for precise myelin water imaging. The precision-optimized acquisition is as fast as conventional SS myelin water imaging acquisitions, but enables 2-3x better expected coefficients of variation in fast-relaxing fraction estimates. Simulations without model mismatch demonstrate that PERK (Chapter 5) and ML fast-relaxing fraction estimates from the proposed DESS acquisition exhibit comparable root mean-squared errors, but PERK is more than 500x faster. Simulations with modest levels of model mismatch suggest that in vivo differences between DESS and conventional multi-echo spin-echo (MESE) myelin water images may be attributable to either unaccounted bulk-T1 modeling errors and accounted flip angle variation in MESE estimates and/or the two-compartment assumption in DESS estimates. Nevertheless, in vivo experiments are to our knowledge the first to demonstrate lateral WM myelin water content estimates from a fast (3m15s) SS acquisition that are similar to conventional estimates from a slower (32m4s) MESE acquisition. 
